Automatic case generator and launcher (#716)
lethe-cfd/lethe: doc/source/tools/automatic_launch/automatic_launch.rst

======================================================================
How to automatically create and launch Lethe simulations
======================================================================

.. seealso::
	All files used in this example are available in the `lethe/contrib/utilities <https://github.com/lethe-cfd/lethe/tree/master/contrib/utilities>`_ under ``automatic_launch``.

The main python scripts of this tutorial are:

- ``generate_cases_locally.py``
- ``generate_cases_cluster.py``
- ``launch_lethe_locally.py``
- ``launch_lethe_cluster.py``

.. seealso::
	The example :doc:`../../examples/incompressible-flow/3d-mixer-using-single-rotating-frame/3d-mixer-using-single-rotating-frame` uses really similar automatic launch scripts.

-------------------------------------
Generate automatically multiple cases
-------------------------------------
Lets say that you are simulating a flow around a cylinder and you want to see how the inlet velocity impacts the force around the sphere.

> Lasy as we are, we want to automatically generate multiple copies of the cylinder case, but change the parameter file so the boundary condition 
> imposing the inlet velocity is different for each case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lazy as we are, we want to automatically generate multiple copies of the cylinder case, but change the parameter file so the inlet velocity in the boundary condition is different for each case.
```

To do so, we use the `Jinja2 <https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/>`_ python package.
It allows us to create a parameter file template, where some parameter variables, in double brackets ``{{}}``, can be replace to any value we want.

The boundary conditions section in the ``.prm`` file becomes as follow.

.. code-block:: text
    
    subsection boundary conditions
      set number = 3
      subsection bc 0
        set type = noslip
      end
      subsection bc 1
        set type = function
        subsection u
          set Function expression = {{velocity_x}}
        end
        subsection v
          set Function expression = 0
        end
        subsection w
          set Function expression = 0
        end
      end
      subsection bc 2
        set type = slip
      end
    end

.. note::
	Note the ``{{velocity_x}}`` parameter variable in the Jinja2 format.
	This will allow us to insert a specified value for a case of the 2D around a cylinder. 

We will now present how to generate multiple folders, containing different parameters files, to ultimately launch them as separated cases.

> We can generate these folders locally and even on a cluster.

Author: The doc is really about installation. In this example, I focus more on the use of Python scripts on the cluster, which is not documented anywhere. Or I am not sure what you mean!

> We can generate these folders locally and even on a cluster.

Author: Never mind ;)

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
Locally
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
Before importing the packages, we need to install them using ``pip`` and ``requirements.txt`` (available in the lethe-utils folder).

.. code-block:: text
    
	pip install -r requirements.txt

Then, we can import the right packages to launch the script.

.. code-block:: python
    
	from jinja2 import Template
	import os
	import numpy as np
	import shutil

The first thing to do, is set up the constants of the script.

.. code-block:: python
    
	PATH = os.getcwd()
	CASE_PREFIX = 'cylinder_u_'
	PRM_FILE = 'cylinder.prm'
	MESH_FILE = 'cylinder-structured.msh'

The ``PATH`` is the current path of the user directory where all cases' folders will be placed.
The ``CASE_PREFIX`` will specify how we want to name each folder.
The ``PRM_FILE`` is the name of the parameter file of the Lethe simulation.
The ``MESH_FILE`` is the name of the mesh used for the simulations.

.. warning::

> 	The ``.msh`` file is not available as it is. You will need to run ``gmsh`` in order to generate the mesh around the cylinder from the ``.geo`` file.

Author: Good idea!

	|   |       cylinder.prm

.. hint::
	Verify that the ``cylinder.prm`` files in each folder have a different boundary condition at ``bc = 1``. This means that the Jinja2 script worked perfectly fine.

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
On Digital Alliance of Canada clusters
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
If you want to generate different cases of a 2D flow around a cylinder, but on a cluster, the same script applies, with minor differences.

Before launching the script, we strongly suggest you to create a virtual environment. It is much easier to download the packages that you need.

1. Load the python module on the cluster.

.. code-block:: text

	module load python/3.X

2. Create the virtual environment.

.. code-block:: text

	virtualenv --no-download ENV

3. Activate the virtual environment.

.. code-block:: text

	source ENV/bin/activate

.. note::
	The tag ``(ENV)`` should appear before the command prompt, meaning that you are in your virtual environment.

4. Install the requirements of the script.

.. code-block:: text

	pip install -r requirements.txt

To leave the virtual environment, just deactivate it with the command ``deactivate``.

> You can now launch the script on the cluser. Be sure to activate your virtual environment and change these lines of code that are specific to the cluster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now launch the script on the cluster. Be sure to activate your virtual environment and change these lines of code that are specific to the cluster:
```

1. Specify the shell script that will launch a job on the cluster.

.. code-block:: python

	SHELL_FILE = 'launch_lethe.sh'

2. Copy the ``.sh`` from the current ``PATH`` to the ``case_path``.

.. code-block:: python

	shutil.copy(f'{PATH}/{SHELL_FILE}', f'{case_path}/{SHELL_FILE}')

> This last step allows to launch one batch script for each case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This last step allows launching a bash script for each case.
```

> The ``launch_lethe.sh`` is the batch script that send the simulation to the cluster scheduler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``launch_lethe.sh`` is the bash script that sends the simulation to the cluster scheduler.
```

.. note::

> 	See the documentation about :doc:`../../installation/digital_alliance` to make a proper batch script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	See the documentation about :doc:`../../installation/digital_alliance` to make a proper bash script.
```

> If you have multiple cases to launch on the cluster (let's say 100 thousand), it is not a good idea to launch a really heavy python script to the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have multiple cases to launch on the cluster (let's say 100 thousand), it is not a good idea to launch a really heavy Python script on the cluster.
```

> Otherwise, a crying baby panda will appear and hunt you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do this, a crying baby panda will appear and hunt you.
```

Reviewer 2: I would even make an awarning with this. EPIC!

> To do so, it is recommended to create another batch script that launches the automatic generator itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do so, it is recommended to create another bash script that launches the automatic generator itself.
```

> Let's name the automatic generator script is named ``launch_cases.py``. Here is an example of how to make the batch script:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The automatic generator script is named ``launch_cases.py``. Here is an example of how to make the batch script:
```

Reviewer 2: I believe that is what you meant

.. code-block:: text

	#!/bin/bash
	#SBATCH --time=02:00:00
	#SBATCH --account=$yourgroupaccount
	#SBATCH --ntasks=1
	#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=32G
	#SBATCH --mail-type=FAIL
	#SBATCH --mail-user=$your.email.adress@email.provider
	#SBATCH --output=%x-%j.out

	source $SCRATCH/ENV/bin/activate
	srun python3 launch_cases.py

.. note::

> 	Note that we activate the virtual environement, in order to have the packages required, and we launch the python script with ``srun``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	Note that we activate the virtual environment in order to have the packages required, and then we launch the Python script with ``srun``.
```

-----------------------------------
Launch automatically multiple cases
-----------------------------------

> Now that the folders of every cases are all set up, we can launch Lethe automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that the folders of every case are all set up, we can launch Lethe automatically.
```

> Both python scripts to launch Lethe locally and on the cluster are simple and are presented below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both Python scripts to launch Lethe locally and on the cluster are simple and are presented below.
```

Here is the script:

1. Set up the constants of the script.

.. code-block:: python

	PATH = os.getcwd()
	PRM_FILE = 'cylinder.prm'
	LETHE_EXEC = 'gls_navier_stokes_2d'

.. warning::
	Here, we suppose that the executable ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` is available directly in the ``PATH`` where all cases' folders are present.
	If your Lethe executable is elsewhere, just change the path to the right destination.

2. Enter each case's folder and execute Lethe.

.. code-block:: python

	for root, directories, files in os.walk(PATH):
		if PRM_FILE in files and root != PATH:
			os.chdir(root)
			os.system(f'{LETHE_EXEC} {PRM_FILE}')

.. note::
	If you want to run each simulation with more than one core, change the last line for ``os.system(f'mpirun -np $n {LETHE_EXEC} {PRM_FILE}')``, with ``n`` being the number of CPU cores.

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
On Digital Alliance of Canada clusters
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
The same script applies for launching all cases on a cluster. The advantage is that we send jobs to the scheduler, meaning that we can run multiple simulations at a time, instead of doing it one after the other.

> The only difference is the command line to launch the batch script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The only difference is the command line to launch the bash script.
```
